## Magnetic Force on a Particle
- The strength of the magnetic force on a charged particle follows the formula
\\[\overrightarrow F_M=q(\overrightarrow v \times \overrightarrow B)\\]
where \\(\overrightarrow F_M\\) is the magnetic force vector, \\(q\\) is the particle's charge, \\(\overrightarrow v\\) is the particle's velocity vector, and \\(\overrightarrow B)\\) is the magnetic field vector.
<div class="callout callout--info">
Note the cross product. \\(\overrightarrow v \times \overrightarrow B\\) is equal to \\(vB\sin\theta\\). This means that if a particle moves parallel to the magnetic field, the magnetic force will be \\(0\\). The direction of the force vector is determined by the right hand rule, so the magnetic force will always act perpendicular to the particle's velocity.
</div>
- In a uniform magnetic field, the magnetic force acts like a centripetal force, causing charged particles to move in a circular path. You will often need to set the centripetal force (\\(F_C=\frac{mv^2}r\\)) equal to \\(F_M\\) and solve for one of the variables: \\(\frac{mv^2}r=qvB\\), therefore \\(\frac{mv}r=qB\\)

## Magnetic Force on a Current-Carrying Wire
- The magnetic force on a current-carrying wire follows the formula
\\[\overrightarrow F_M=\int I(\overrightarrow{dl}\times \overrightarrow  B)\\]
where \\(I\\) is the current in the wire, \\(dl\\) represents integration over the wire's length, and \\(\overrightarrow B\\) is the external magnetic field.
(Example here)
- For a loop of wire, the net magnetic force will be zero, but there may be a net torque.

## Magnetic Fields Created by Current-Carrying Wires
- The magnetic field created by a long, straight current-carrying wire follows the formula:
\\[B=\frac{\mu_0 I}{2\pi r}\\]
where \\(\mu_0\\) is a constant called the vacuum permeability, \\(I\\) is the current in the wire, and \\(r\\) is the distance from the wire.
- The magnetic field curls around the wire following the right hand rule if your thumb points in the direction of the conventional current.
- Principle of superposition: If you have multiple wires, calculate \\(\overrightarrow B\\) for each one, then add all the \\(\overrightarrow B\\) vectors together.
- A solenoid is a wire coiled many times in a spiral shape. The magnetic field inside a solenoid follows the equation
\\[B=\mu_o nI\\]
where n is the number of coils.

## Biot-Savart Law
- The Biot-Savart law describes the magnetic field at a point near a current-carrying wire.
\\[d\overrightarrow B=\frac{\mu_o}{4\pi}\frac{I(d\overrightarrow l\times \widehat r)}{r^2}\\]
Breaking this down: \\(\mu_0\\) is the vacuum permeability, \\)I\\) is current, and \\(r\\) is distance of this point from the wire. \\(d\overrightarrow l\\) represents an infinitesimal length of the wire, and \\(d\overrightarrow B\\) represents the amount of magnetic field that that length of wire contributes to the total value of \\(B\\). By taking the interal of each side, you can find the total magnetic field at the point. \\(\widehat r\\) is the unit vector (it has a magnitude of 1) which specifies the direction from the current to the point you are measuring.
- AP might have you use this rule to calculate the magnetic field along the axis of a circular loop of current. (Insert example here)

## Ampere's Law
- Ampere's law for magnetism is similar to Gauss's law for electrostatics. It states that if you draw an imaginary loop (called an Amperian loop) around a current-carrying wire, and integrate the magnetic field over that loop, the value will be equal to the vacuum permeability times the current enclosed in the loop:
\\[\oint\overrightarrow B\cdot d\overrightarrow l=\mu_0 I\\]
- In AP, \\(\overrightarrow B\\) will always be constant, and your amperian loop will usually be a circle. In this case, the formula becomes:
\\[\overrightarrow B2\pi r=\mu_0 I\\]
This is where the formula for the field generated by a long, current carrying wire originates from.
